[Music]
please
how do you tell if it's depression with
a capital d or just an
off day let me preface this by saying
that i regularly see a therapist and a
gp for mental health issues already good
for you
after 10 plus years of struggling with
recurrent periods of moderate depression
i have only recently realized that not
everybody feels this way
props to my therapist for that one
previously i'd assumed that everyone
else felt as crappy as i do
but they were just better at dealing
with it than i am which is obviously
which obviously didn't help the negative
self talk beautiful so insightful right
so like this is what the depressed mind
tells you
oh everyone feels this way they're just
better at it than i am i just suck more
than they do
that's so you see that how this person
pointed out the self-talk right away
they caught it
really good so recently i have accepted
that wow i probably have
clinical depression i say probably
because i've never
asked about a diagnosis it's not needed
for insurance or any other reason where
i live but i suspect my gp
would agree and slap the label on if i
asked
i've been working on being kinder to
myself when depressive episodes hit
eg focusing on self-care not berating
myself for being
unproductive which is going okay when
i'm in a really bad place is it's easy
to recognize
capital d depression when i'm so tired
and sad that i can't get off the couch
for hours at a time
but the block i've hit is what to do
when it's a milder period i'm a little
sad
low level tired all the time having a
harder time focusing
but it's not bad enough to justify being
a useless sad couch cocoon
all day my internal dialogue is confused
when this happens
i know that i should try to be kind to
myself but i don't think that writing
off the entire day to self-care is the
best option
partly because these mildly depressed
days are fairly common and partly
because committing to not
really getting anything done on a given
day easily
snowballs into two three four etc days
for me that can lead to a more intense
depressive episode
okay so how do i tell if i'm just having
a bit
of an off day and need to push myself a
bit to get work done
at what point do i call it and just stop
even trying to work because i'm not
getting anything done anyway
and continuing to try is just making me
more frustrated and angry with myself
it's easy to make the call when i'm
really depressed but it's a lot harder
to gauge
when i have milder symptoms that for
most people could just be classified as
an off day
note that i'm a grad student working
from home right now
i have quite a lot of flexibility in my
working hours as long as i continue to
make progress in my research my super
advisor is happy and i don't have set
hours
this is something that i'm actively
discussing with my therapist i was just
wondering if anyone here could relate
and has any suggestions or insights
okay love this case brilliant okay
so first of all the person's doing the
right thing okay talking to your
therapist about it is the right move
so you know how this person was saying
that
i didn't realize that other people
didn't feel this way i thought this was
normal
i had no idea so i'm going to toss out
something and really
interesting analysis of this situation
sometimes this is what getting better
from depression
actually looks like so let's actually
look at this for a second okay so the
person used to be
very depressed would snowball into five
days
so the question i know it sounds really
bizarre but
as severe clinical depression starts to
get
better what does it look like
right so instead of losing five days you
have one
off day and you're not quite sure is
this the real depression with a capital
d
or is this not so this is sometimes what
clinical improvement can look like
okay so remember that depression is not
binary
it's not like capital d and little d
depression
is not is is like a you know it's a
spectrum
so there's severe depression there's
moderate depression there's mild
depression
and as we start to actually get better
right so as you've started to reduce the
negative self-talk
as you've started to force yourself to
work when you don't feel like it
as all of those things start to happen
the severity of your clinical depression
is going to decrease
and so this is a sign that you're doing
things right because now you're not as
sick as you used to be
and so now this gets kind of confusing
because you're like well like am i
actually depressed or am i not depressed
you're like
you probably have milder manifestations
of depression
that are still like occurring so this is
where i'd say you know there are a
couple of other important things to
remember so remember that
clinical depression is an episodic
illness that lasts anywhere from a few
weeks to
up to a year and during the episode you
can have
fluctuation of symptoms in between so
what i'm hearing from this situation is
that you are
actually in or like if some this person
walked into my office
the way that i would understand this
like with just this scenario there's a
lot more that needs to go into making a
clinical diagnosis
is that there is an active episode that
is being held
at bay by your significant efforts
because this person even says if i stop
doing it it can snowball very easily
so this is the kind of thing where it's
like my boat was leaky very leaky had a
bunch of holes and it was sinking
actively and i patched up some of the
holes there are still some small holes
left
now i don't have to panic anymore and
i'm but i still have to empty water out
of a bucket
it's not like a gigantic terror
situation but i still have to do some
work
if i stop bailing water my boat starts
to sink again
what's going on here is it good or is it
bad is it real depression is it not real
depression
this really sounds to me like a
situation where there may be an active
depressive episode that is still
ongoing which due to the effort that
you're putting in
is reducing the severity of your
symptoms so i would say
absolutely keep doing what you're doing
talk to your therapist about it
and then kind of like be aware that
every day that you give into it
you know like it may snowball but and i
know it's frustrating i know it's hard
to like
pull yourself out of it um or you know
try
because you can't like pull yourself at
it like i know it's like you're it
sounds to me like you're getting
exhausted
because you're still like working but
like i know it sounds kind of weird but
i think that the effort that you're
putting in
is the reason that you continue to have
mild depressive days from here to here
like every now and then like you know
mild depressive day here mild depressive
day they're
not as bad and that's because of all the
work that you're putting in in each one
of those days when you feel a little bit
frustrated because you're like i'm not
sure if this is real i'm not sure if i'm
doing it right
it's not exactly getting better what i
want you to realize is
every day that you don't give into it
makes
one day the next week better makes
another day two weeks from now better
so this is really it's a really good
illustration of what dealing with
depression actually looks like
it's really severe and very noticeable
and as it starts to get better
as it starts to get milder you start
scratching your head and you're like is
this
clinical is it depression with a big d
not a big d
and the more that you work at it
hopefully over time those days will
happen less often so they'll reduce in
frequency severity and duration
so good luck to you